we had the discussion with my old friend
Mohammed the other day for a couple
hours and he asked me a sort of simple
and fundamental question about the
history of centralization and for most
of our history as human being as a
planet Earth that comes down to
questions of empire questions of
nationality local self-government nation
states as opposed to larger empires
bringing together many different peoples
with many different languages and now in
the 21st century we deal with many of
the same issues and questions but using
very different jargon now why did he put
this question to me it's because he
knows I'm a very unusual person for any
white english-speaking person in
politics today I mean this is not just
unusual for the left for the center or
for the right it is unusual anywhere on
the white western english-speaking
spectrum to openly say that the balance
of power is doctrine in European history
was a mistake that this was a profound
fundamental mistake so what do I mean I
mean that just to give an example if you
look at the period when Napoleon was
ruling Europe look let's say you're
gonna study that University course so
you'll probably look at the 50 years of
history before Napoleon and you'll maybe
briefly look at the 50 years after what
you'll find again and again and again is
this idea that what's best what is best
for Europe is for Europe to be divided
between several equal mutually
antagonistic great powers to have at all
times a kind of internecine war and the
parties negotiating these bizarre
agreements and pacts they don't really
care too much if it's the French against
the Spanish or if it's the French and
the Spanish on the same side against
everyone else but that one way or
another the kind of the sports team have
to be drawn up you know there are the
Russians and there are the Dutch and
they work so that there are various
empires constantly at war with one
another that centralization is bad that
too much power and in any one place is
dead now I think that this philosophy
really began
with the rule of emperor charles v i
think that was the period it's a very
deep medieval assumption basically since
people gave up on the concept of the
Roman Empire the Roman Empire you could
say was one kind of delusion of
centralization of one Empire ruling all
of Europe how you define Europe changes
from century to century and then when
people give up on that idea of Rome
whether it's the first Rome or the
second Rome or the third Rome then they
go over to this idea that what's best
for Europe is to be constantly divided
internally and and very briefly you guys
may or may not know this but if you were
to look at the history of the Caribbean
if you were even to look at the history
of the islands of Southeast Asia
so like Indonesia and beyond into Samoa
and so on Europeans exported this
assumption with the oh they're really
the best way to organize life in the
Caribbean is that the Caribbean divided
between various mutually hostile
antagonistic European empires that are
in a constant state of war against one
another which includes piracy and slave
trading all these things oh you know
what the best thing is gonna be for the
people of Samoa is if the Dutch and the
Germans the British and the French are
all they're competing if everyone has a
piece of it so on for South America that
this is what is best for mankind and to
be clear we're not talking about free
market competition we're not talking
about the idea that in economics it's
better for you if you have your choice
between Coke and Pepsi and Fanta that
there are several different choices for
economic competition this is explicitly
military competition this is competition
between empires so Muhammad knows this
about me
that I say when you look at the history
of China one of the great advantages
that they have is that they were not
burdened by this delusion that
internally dividing themselves and being
in a constant state of civil war so to
speak that wasn't advantageous that what
was really advantageous was having one
Emperor one system of exams you know and
then a system of Education that's
attached to those exams one bureaucracy
and yes whenever possible one army for a
huge area that had many different
Volken languages less diversity in
written languages but that's that's
another story and you really can look at
China as being a a world unto itself in
the same way that when you look at all
of Europe or all of the Roman Empire
it's not one country it's a world unto
itself or there's the idea of
centralized political leadership in this
case so with all this having said about
context what is basically my view about
centralization and decentralization now
in the 21st century this is what I was
challenged on are asked about by my
friend Mohamed and I think my view is so
simple it can be kind of stated in one
sentence I think what human beings yearn
for and require is a system of local
decision making but centralized
enforcement what do I mean by this I
think people want to meet at their local
City Hall to decide where the roads will
be built and which buildings will be
bulldozed to build the roads they may
also want to meet at their local City
Hall to debate what the speed limit will
be on the road however they don't want
to hire a local sign painter to paint
the speed limit sign by hand they don't
particularly need local workmen to
actually build the road or do the
demolition most fundamentally they
probably don't want local guides with
local family connections collecting
taxes they would benefit from having a
highly professional centralized
impersonal bureaucracy that collects the
taxes the sign that says speed limit 80
whatever this basement is that might be
painted at a centralized factory in a
centralized workshop or warehouse and
sent to them they voted on what the
speed limit is but they didn't make the
sign it may be made to standard
specifications so that all the speed
limit signs look the same for there what
a huge huge country or huge empire so
that all the stop signs look the same
that stuff shouldn't be decentralized
shouldn't be localized and again sir
shouldn't it need not be that's not what
people yearn for that's not what people
want in democracy I don't think there's
any legitimacy and saying well we have
our own local democracy we make stop
signs our way we make speed limit signs
our way or even even we pave the roads
our way I think that local democracy you
know you want to be engaging in
deliberation at the level of local
democracy you want to be engaging in
debate at the level of local democracy
but when it comes to execution
implementation and enforcement those are
things that have to be centralized now
the only other riddle here I mean that's
this is almost everything I've sent out
but the one footnote is I think that
people do not think often enough about
government in terms of research research
also must be partly centralized so let's
say you have a local government local
city council like this and they say well
we think the river is polluted we're
getting so much but we don't really know
so again they can debate it they can
discuss it they can vote on it but they
need to be able to take a water sample
and probably send it to a laboratory
that's run by the centralized government
it's not going to be possible for every
little local city authority to have its
own lab staff and to be able to
scrutinize and hire you know look at
someone's CV and say okay are you really
competent to do these tests on the water
and are we gonna trust you are we gonna
trust this guy they probably need to
have access to some kind of you know
again kind of independent centralized
empire-wide Kingdom high nationwide a
laboratory that's going to receive that
water sample and give them a
standardized test and give them a result
and it'll be able to tell them in a
scientifically verifiable and valid way
you know yes it's polluted no it's not
here's your the the contents of the
water and you know even kind of
historical research even checking
records for who owns what property or
what happened historically there was a
town in Canada it's not worth mentioning
why I did this research and had a really
interesting history of native people
owning the land and then white people
mysteriously
stealing the land this is recent this
isn't 400 years ago or something I think
is about 80 years ago you know there
were and there are records well you know
that local city hall they shouldn't just
be in a position of kind of questioning
local people who are gonna have strong
economic and said if you'll come in and
say my grandfather owned this land and
he didn't steal it from any native
people and you know they're gonna give
you they're totally biased perspective
even for something like this that maybe
local history you have some capacity to
reach out to the National Archives or
some National Research Institute and say
look we need somebody with a PhD to go
to the archives and establish how you
know how was the land claim negotiated
how were these boundaries don't know
what's the real lord we have some
records here at City Hall but there were
complaints from different quarters we
don't know what to do about it we need
some kind of fact-finding mission we
need some kind of investigation so again
I don't think I've ever read a
constitution of any country that set
down research as a crucial part of
government but in all these ways and
more research establishing the facts
when you call it a commission of inquiry
or what have you it really is one of the
most important functions of government
and in this way it has to be to some
extent centralized
so that's the that's the lesson I come
to and I'll be honest to you guys I
already came to that conclusion
1998-1999 this is one of my first
breakthroughs in political science and I
came to it because I was a very harsh
critic of everything that was going on
in communism and socialism on the far
left they have their whole crazy
discourse about centralization and then
I was also a critic of what was going on
in neoliberalism on the far right and at
that time they were really glamourizing
decentralization in a very irresponsible
way where to them decentralization was
an excuse to not provide education to
the poor and this kind of thing was it
well you don't want the central
government controlling education it's so
on and the reality is this is just gonna
mean rich people sending their kids to
private school and this kind of thing
was this really and would dishonest use
of decentralization to justify various
sort of right-wing agendas and
privatization
in general so kind of beasts merging the
public sector and nonprofit sector and
what-have-you
so yeah what you see in an example like
Athens ancient Athens thousands of years
ago is a society that had created the
most fundamental mechanism of the
centralized state which is centralized
taxation so the head the head money you
know in one store house so to speak and
if you read constitution of Athens by
Aristotle they were very fastidious
about who was literally guarding the
money
day by day who was responsible they were
very very worried about corruption and
theft from the public purse and then
they had everyone in the city come
together and decide how they were going
to spend the money and both the
supporters and critics you know it's
interesting they all point out they were
they were very libertine they had
festival after festival and holiday
after holidays you know in peacetime at
least they built public baths so that
poor people well anyway but the rich had
their own ways of bathing apparently but
the poor especially appreciate having a
place to shower and swim and sauna or
whatever they did in these baths that I
really know but bath houses and things
like the Olympic Games and festivals and
things they did actually spend this
money it in a kind of profligate or
joyous way this is this is partly
probably recorded so we have we have a
positive example in some ways but what
Athens utterly lacked
was a concept of having decentralized
decision-making and centralized
enforcement implementation etc and thus
their political system became absurd and
even tyrannical when it simply was
expanded beyond they own town Athens
what it was expanded beyond the walls of
the Agora
their relationships to even their
immediate neighbors and Athens did
briefly grow into an empire they were as
despicable and hated as any Kingdom or
any tyranny when they ran their empire
it was it was all the same to the
conquered people because you still had
the same group of people in one
marketplace right here we're here in
Athens right here at the Penix
making decisions for far-flung cities
and so on and so forth
they didn't recognize those other cities
as making these these decisions and they
didn't recognize their government as in
this way being a kind of servant of
having the whether you think of it as
bureaucratic implementation enforcement
because indeed this includes law
enforcement I mean there's there's no
greater evil than having a corrupt
police department and this is still a
huge problem throughout the United
States of America it's a problem in
various parts of Europe to various
extents you don't want the local
policemen to be a guy you went to high
school with you might think you do now
actually pause to think about the actual
people you went to high school class you
might think it would be great to walk
into the police station but oh yeah if I
remember you from high school okay what
if you slept with Biff's girlfriend what
if Biff slept with your girlfriend what
if Biff beat you up after the football
game that time the level of corruption
of them taking bribes then being married
to your sister
family entanglement and so on what you'd
much rather have is in a sense a
professional centralized distant and
remote enforcement of the law but where
your role is to go down to the
Parliament go down to the Penix
participate in deciding on what the laws
should be and then you centralize how
those laws are implemented and forced
and so on